I know you're really going to enjoy
this. Put your hands together and
welcome Muddy Waters, Carson Block. I'm
so fascinated by your career, what
you've done, what you've built.
I first kind of became aware of you
I don't know, it seems like it was a
long time ago with the reverse Chinese
mergers and Sino Forest and wait, China
is doing what? I don't understand any of
this.
Tell us how you kind of fell into that
aspect of
markets and how you ended up becoming an
activist short seller.
Okay, so
I will try to nutshell this, but um
I grew up in investing. Uh my father was
an equity analyst and
um
yeah, I was working with him from '99 to
'02 alongside
covering microcaps.
And we were just getting lied to
incessantly by these managements. And
back then they had 45 days to file their
forms four, so we'd take them on
non-deal roadshow to meet institutions,
stock would go up, and we'd find out
later that they hit the bid. So, um
this is the same time that you had the
largest companies in the world like
Enron, WorldCom, HealthSouth, Adelphia
blowing up in accounting scandals. So,
my my realization around 2002, I was
really demoralized. It's like look, I
want to be an investor, but this is this
market is riddled with financial
predators from top to bottom. How do I
protect myself against that? So,
I went to law school with just this
amorphous idea that that would give me
some tools and you know, fast forward
decided to practice law, ended up in
China, Jones Day, left to start the
first self-storage business in mainland
China. I don't recommend it. Um and
anyway, I was just sort of, you know,
keep trying to keep that business from
failing in 2009 when my father got
really excited about a bunch of these
Chinese companies that had gone public
in the US via reverse merger. And like I
had my own problems. I wasn't really
that interested, but he asked me to look
and he asked me to look at this first
one called Orient Paper.
And first thing you told me, he'd been
at a conference that these guys had gone
to and you know, what he's hearing is,
oh, you know, Chairman Leo, he's
different from other Chinese company
chairman. He doesn't smoke and he
doesn't chase women. And you know, my
father's telling me this while I'm in,
you know, late night in Shanghai and I'm
like
wait.
I'm sure neither of those things is
actually true.
But the fact that this is making its
rounds at the conference, somebody is
trying to game Western investor
psychology. So, that got my attention.
Early 2010, went up to see the company
and it was a Potemkin factory. Like I
never believed that such a thing could
exist where at the time its market cap
was 150 million, had just reported $103
million in revenue.
And the real revenue?
It's two to five million dollars. Like
that it was this you know, empty box.
So, I exposed that with the 30-some-odd
page report and the only reason I did
that was I felt like I was stuck in my
business in Shanghai. I had like a few
hundred people who are leaving their
stuff in my facility.
The industry did not exist because it's
a bad industry to be in in China. And
I don't know, there's like a power in
feeling like you have nothing to lose.
So, I just threw the ball as far down
the field as I could. Wrote that report.
It went viral. Um
I quickly found out this was systemic
and one year later Bloomberg's like, oh,
he's one of the 50 most influential in
global finance with, you know, Ben
Bernanke and Warren Buffett. And I was
like, well, yes, of course. That's the
natural path from self-storage.
>> That's every 30-page analyst report
tends to lead to that. So, it's funny
cuz
you and I kind of came of age in the
markets similar period. The dot-com
implosion was certainly fundamental to
my view of both markets and short
sellers and then the financial crisis.
How do you look at how the markets have
changed over the ensuing decade as
between QE and zero interest rate policy
and more recently the CARES Act and the
massive fiscal stimulus?
I grew up thinking short sellers were
the ones who kept the market honest and
responsible.
That seems to be a minority view these
days.
Yeah, well
I've come to the view that there's an
inverse relationship between interest
rates and the amount of dishonesty in
society. So,
the lower your rates, the more easy
money is, the more dishonesty you get in
society. And so, the emergency monetary
policy
outlived the emergency.
And what, you know, what I felt is that
just each year I've been doing this,
that investors are more and more
anesthetized to risk. Now, the flip side
of that is
that behaviors that were once really
only present in microcap land, well,
those bubble up to midcap land because
of the inflation of market cap. So, on
one hand my business has gotten harder
because unless it's something really,
really egregious
like people don't care, but then yes,
you'll find that type of behavior now
even in midcap companies. And you know,
in an environment where
and and just to be clear
the it's a small minority of companies
that are frauds. The world's bigger
problem is the gray zone. Right? The
things where yeah, nobody's going to get
convicted. It's tech you know, lawyers
have signed off. The auditor's okay with
it. And that gray zone behavior whereby
you can significantly misrepresent
economic reality that is almost maybe
the norm in many respects.
>> So, so the secret is to corrupt the
attorneys and the auditors and then it's
home free.
Wait, corrupts the attorneys?
Right? So
>> That's So, you mentioned microcap, small
cap, midcaps. I read a note of yours not
too long ago talking about the big caps
and the mega caps where so many people
have been calling this a bubble and so
many people have saying, gee, I'd like
to short Nvidia. You kind of went out of
your way to say, hey, maybe one day
there's a downside play here, but this
freight train is really difficult to
step in front of. What are your thoughts
on on the hyperscalers, the mega cap
tech companies? Okay, well
all right, three things.
Number one
there are easier, better shorts out
there than Nvidia.
Um number two um
what my I I think it's worth
considering. So, the reason why I was
making those comments is that flows have
driven so much of this. Like the you
have obviously the passive bid and it
squeezes floats. And by squeezing
floats, it's not a linear impact on
stock prices. It's a parabolic impact on
stock prices, at least of the winners.
So,
the idea that something is overvalued,
that's a reference to its fundamental
value, but I think you have to consider
its technical value. And that's what
everybody fails to
say when they're criticizing these
things on a fundamental basis. It's
like, well, what are the technicals of
this? Now,
that's my second point. My third point
is
um up till one month ago, I was
completely sanguine on the on S&P and
markets in general and the economy. And
my view has 180'd. And I think
the wrong question is, well, what do you
think of the valuations or stock prices
of XYZ of these AI companies? And the
right question is, what is about to
happen to society and to the market as a
result of AI? And I And like I said, 180
on this. Like a month ago, I wouldn't
even refer to these models as AI. I had
this rule, these are large language
models, they are not going to create new
information, they merely process
information that's already out there.
Don't call it AI. They're LLMs, but I
call it AI now.
>> Right. They're neither artificial nor
intelligent, they're something else. But
given that and given this 180, but we're
going to dive right into AI in a minute.
But since you built your reputation
before the firm has pivoted into a
full-service research shop both long and
short you've criticized SPACs, crypto,
thematic ETFs, NFTs. Where has there
been the biggest destruction of investor
wealth in that group?
Well, in that group Okay, so it's a
little bit in vogue, I think, to point
uh toward private credit right now. Mhm.
And the reality is like who knows,
right? There's
there's no data, it's really opaque. My
concerns there and and I recognize that
data is not the plural of anecdote, but
in the past few months, some of the
research we've done, I like I I've
looked at some um ABS issuers. And this
is not private credit. But I was really
surprised to see as I went down the
rabbit hole of ABS issuances that
a lot of the paperwork that should be
done to to
show release of liens of loans that are
being securitized and filed publicly,
that paperwork is not being filed
publicly. And I at first I thought, "Oh
my god, we've got these guys on fraud.
They're They're selling off loans that
are still encumbered." And I spoke with
a couple of
securitization attorneys, and they said,
"No, no, no, that's market practice. The
warehouse lender just provides a letter
saying that the liens are released. It
doesn't get filed publicly." And so I
asked each of them, "Well, what's to
stop the sponsor of the securitization
from forging the letter because he
thinks like, 'Look, the loans are the
ABSs are already over collateralized. I
can double pledge these.'"
You know, because if the warehouse
lender if it's not public, the warehouse
lender wouldn't know if somebody forged
it.
Huh.
Yeah.
That's a good point.
And so I when I see that the largest
financial institutions are not dotting
i's and crossing t's, you know, I I that
conversation with somebody recently you
gave me data point from a private equity
firm that's doing a lot of CLOs. The
conversation from somebody who's on the
PE side going to the CLO guys was like,
"Hey,
so what do we know about the performance
of the underlying loans? Like what How
are they performing? Huh? Why would we
track that? We don't service them." Like
this is reminiscent of Right out of the
right out of the Big Short. Yeah, this
is reminiscent of some of the behaviors
in credit. So then, okay, I combine,
again, it's not data, these are
anecdotes, but I combine that with also
what I noticed starting a few years ago.
You know, every time I talk to an
allocator, you know, cuz I'm we're
actually we run a fund. We're we're a
hedge fund. So, you know, we're talking
to allocators all the time, and you
know, what are you what are you guys
investing in? Everybody all of a sudden
starts saying private credit, private
credit, private credit.
And I don't know what this is. Like I'm
thinking like did somebody just invent a
new and improved way to have sex? Like
why is everybody talking about private
credit? And you know, that also reminds
me the internet bubble because the way I
used to think about that as it was
happening
is there's too much money chasing too
few investable companies. So, I don't
think if there are problems in private
credit, like my first bet is not that
it's at Apollo, but I also know we have
looked at the insurance industry. And so
I know a lot of these insurers have been
bought by smaller PE firms. I mean,
they're basically using these things to
finance their deals. The FT did a great
article a few Alphaville a few months
ago on the credit ratings agencies. I
mean, it's not even S&P and Moody's. The
number one is Egan Jones. So, corporate
headquarters is like an eight-bedroom
house in suburban Boston, literally. And
I think they did like 2,000 deals last
year that they rated.
I mean, if you lived through the GFC
and were paying attention, you know,
like starting to see some dots connect.
So, that does have me worried also. And
if that does intersect with what I think
could happen in the labor markets from
AI job displacement,
you know, like I know you want to pivot
back to it, but I'm just going to put it
out there.
I can
I think it's not unrealistic to say 15%
of knowledge work jobs in the US in 3
years are gone.
And I in 3 years 3 years. And if it's
not three, it's going to be five. But it
might not be 15, it could be 20, 25%. I
mean, that's and I can work through how
I got there. But let's dive deeper into
AI.
It's both an investable asset, a
shortable asset, and a tool that you're
using
to run a business. So, I want to hit
each of those things starting with
how are you using AI as a tool to manage
a business, to identify
long and short opportunities? What is
true AI, not just LLMs, mean for your
daily work?
Well, I mean, in the past, again, since
finding religion just a few weeks ago,
I mean, this is something I've been
hammering. Most of my employees have
worked for me for over 10 years. We're
We're an old firm for a hedge fund. I
mean, I used to joke that, this is
probably true, that if you look at trips
and falls per dollar of AUM, we maybe
are the highest in the world. And that
was kind of funny to say until I started
saying, "Guys, why are you literally
taking months to put together 150-page
slide decks to discuss something
internally?
Stick it in the machine." And so one of
my analysts, my longest-serving
employee, um
ex ex
ex auditor, super bright, but always
struggled with communication. I mean,
one of my skills was
over, you know, months, weeks or months,
many, many hours trying to draw out of
her
the patterns that she sees, but she's
just unable to elucidate.
Now, she's just pumping out the
memoranda from Claude. And I'm like,
"Wow, this is I mean, Cindy, this has
saved us like, you know, probably 5
weeks of, you know, like frustrated
conversations in the conference room."
Like this So, from that perspective,
it's helping. Um
I think hurting a little bit. You know,
I've I've always felt that we have an
edge as activist short sellers over our
competition in terms of how I write and
communicate. Like that edge is gone. I
mean, you can go to Claude and say,
"Hey, you know, write this up as a short
report in the voice of Carson Block."
And
you know, it's it's not bad. I mean, I
it it gets you a lot of the way there.
So, so let me flip the question on you
and ask, how has AI changed the
fraudster's toolkit? What can Claude do
for a fabricated document, deep fakes,
fake video, fake voice, fake docs, fake
everything?
Has it just become an arms race between
the good guys and the bad guys?
Well, look, I mean, the tools for
forgery
never really needed to be that
sophisticated. I mean, one of my
favorite examples of that was the
Peregrine Financial.
Um that guy had
a post office box and an inkjet. And
that's how he forged his auditor
letters. And, you know, that was few
hundred million
>> But Bernie Madoff did not exactly use
the most sophisticated technology. Yeah.
I think the I think the thing that will
get to be more interesting is if you're
a company CEO
and, you know, you're kind of, you know,
like you're pumping your stock price,
you're monetizing it and hitting the
bed. I think the more interesting thing
is querying it, you know,
if I were the CEO of XYZ company, what
would a short seller focus on? You know,
like what should I do about that? So, I
think that we're going to get in this
cat-and-mouse game of preemption
um and reaction. But I mean, at the end
of the day, I mean, if you're, you know,
if you're just ramping your stock price
and mortgaging your future, I mean, I
think as activist short sellers, we'll
still get there, but you could at least
dig a wider moat um around your, you
know, around what you're doing if you
use these AI tools.
So, I always think of short sellers like
Jim Chanos and the original guys who who
really pioneered forensic accounting as
being so deep into the documents. How
useful are tools like Claude co-work as
a forensic accountant to help either
identify patterns in every SEC filing or
honing in on a specific company's
filings and seeing what doesn't smell
right.
Well, that's for me that's a little TBD.
I don't know yet. I mean, I'm not sure
that you can just upload a 10K and say,
"Oh, you know, what's what's dodgy about
this?" I mean, first of all,
one of the one of the secrets, it's not
a secret, but of what we do is we obtain
documents from places people never look.
So, again, like we're, you know, we're
pulling UCC files to look at asset
securitizations.
We love companies that have overseas
subsidiaries because most overseas
jurisdictions, there are publicly filed
financial statements. So, we'll pull
those and upload them. And then also,
I'm sure it really helped connect the
dots with people. I mean, right now or
up till now, we've had to rely on
memory. Like, "Oh, wait. Yeah, this
dude, you know, we've looked at 58
entities. This dude was in that entity.
Oh, interesting." So, the AI is going to
get rid of it it's going to make that
part easy, but you still have to go out
and do the the legwork. And, you know, a
lot of times you have to send people in
person to do document retrieval. So, I
don't think it's as simple as, you know,
"Hey, I woke up today and I want to be
an activist short seller. Like, you
know, what you know, Claude, which
company should I write about?" And, you
know, "What's my thesis?" Like you have
to still do a lot of legwork. But the
the accounting stuff,
you Claude has demonstrated internally,
again, turning my, you know, my
accounting analyst, the former auditor,
turning her
poorly expressed thoughts into actual
words, you know, and of course, she's
iterating with it, "No, no, no, that's
not what I mean."
But it's got real accounting knowledge.
Oh, well, according to ASC blah blah
blah, and this does not meet the
definition of the da da da. And wow, I
mean, that's
it's
it's really interesting. I mean, look, I
think at the end of the day,
part of the edge of being an activist
short seller is the willingness to be
sued
or the tolerance for being sued. So, I'm
not worried that a bunch of people are
going to run out and like commoditize
this. And and I think at the end of the
day, also having a brand where if
everybody can produce skeptical, you
know, pieces. It's also knowing when the
model is kind of bullshitting you,
right? Like
no, no, cuz that happens, too. I mean,
these things are sycophantic. Like,
"Wow, that's brilliant. Of course it's a
fraud, Carson." Like,
you know, no.
And to say nothing of double-checking
for hallucinations and
a bunch of lawyers who have been using
AI keep getting into trouble. Of course,
it's citing cases that don't really
exist and the judge's clerk, also using
AI, discovers these cases don't exist.
But you mentioned a word that's really
fascinating. You mentioned edge.
If all the participants in the markets,
long and short, are using the same
tools, is there any edge to be had there
or is it really about how you're
applying these tools where the edge
comes from?
That's an interesting question. I mean,
on the on the short side, you only make
money if people care, right? And so I
think that's been the the problem that
most
So since the GFC,
almost everybody who was running money
principally focused on short strategies
has gone out of business. I mean, some,
you know, they wrote off into the
sunset, you know, made a bunch of money.
Most carried out. Um
you know, I think the problem that a lot
of the the short sellers have had, and I
I had this, too, you know, and have I
have to actively correct for it, is
you try you tend to view the world the
way it should be, not the way it is. And
so that's the problem. Like when people
short, you know, Tesla cuz, you know,
Elon Musk this and that,
like nobody cares, right? And that
that's that's the thing. So I I think
you to be good on the short side, you
have to understand why people are buying
the stock and you have to have a view
that goes directly against that or that
undermines that thesis. And I think so
much of the time that doesn't happen. So
I don't know. I I I think the I don't
know that this erodes the edge of just
of judgment when it comes the long side
or short side. And then on the long
side, I mean,
kind of buy what the smart money is
buying seems to have worked. Like, I
hate to say it, but you know, again,
technicals versus fundamental value. The
technical value of something,
you know, like I don't know that AI
helps a ton with that right now, but it
it certainly can.
Let Let's talk about AI pretenders, and
I'm pulling something else you had
written a while ago, and there's a
little bit of a rhyme with late '90s,
every company added a dot com and their
stock would see a a pop.
What are you noticing amongst the fake
AI stories, the fake pivots, the
companies that really have nothing
whatsoever to use to do with AI other
than two or three people who work for
the company have a perplexity app on
their phone?
Tell us about the narrative of AI
pretenders. Well, I Look, I think if all
of a sudden a company has started
talking So I first did this shortly
after I started on the on the short
side, um
cloud became the thing, right? And so
then you saw some companies that had
just done a global find and replace.
Like, you know, find this, replace it
with cloud. And so if you see that with
AI in a company's filings and in their
statements, then yeah, I mean, they're
they're probably a pretender. Um
I mean, I think it's pretty clear, you
know, AI real AI requires scale. I mean,
whether you're on the process on the
hardware side or you're, you know, or
you're actually producing the AI models.
So
I don't know. Everybody who's like AI
enabled it And look, I'm I'm out over my
skis here cuz I don't really understand
the technology, but everybody who's AI
enabled, it's like, "Well, what's what's
the foundation? You know, if you are an
AI enabled this, what are you running?
Are you running perplexity, claw, chat
GPT?" And if you're like, "Well, I made
it myself."
No, man, like I'm not going to buy that,
you know, like these things have cost
way too many billions of dollars to
develop for you to be able to vibe code
your AI.
So
short sellers are always looking for a
downside catalyst. When you start
thinking about the mega caps, the
hyperscalers, or anybody else that's
really blown up in value and in price
that's created a little bit of an air
pocket, has that catalyst come in yet or
is there something off in the future
that's going to lead people to say,
"Hey, this has gone too far. We need to
take something off the table"? Well, if
you take my view that a lot of these
names have traded based on their
technical values as opposed to
fundamental,
then you need to get into, okay, like
what what are the underlying technicals
here? So I'm a fan of a guy named Mike
Green of Yeah.
>> Who's Who's roaming around the event if
you haven't bumped into him.
>> No kidding. I'll Okay, I'll text him. I
haven't Yeah. Um so Mike,
so I think Mike is going to prove to be
really prophetic. And so what he's been
saying since maybe '18 or '19 is that so
passive has broken the market, you know,
don't disagree. Um but that when the
flows, especially the buying from the
target date funds,
tapers off and then you get net
outflows,
that's when you get, as he calls it or
was calling it, 1929 magnitude crash at,
you know, fill in the year, you know,
fill in the blank with the year, speed.
And that's what scares me about AI
because, you know, like I said, if if I
if this thesis is correct that in 3
years or a few years, 15% of knowledge
workers have lost their jobs, it's not
like they're going to find new jobs.
It's not like, you know, fiscal or
monetary stimulus creates new knowledge
work jobs.
They are going to and they all have
college debt, mortgages, car leases.
Eventually, they're going to start
hitting up their 401(k)s. And so first,
they stop contributing as they're laid
off. Then they need that money and they
start taking early redemptions. And so
if Mike Green is correct that when that
happens, there's nobody there to catch
the falling knife and the technicals
have basically for, you know, better
since the GFC just created this
tremendous amount of air,
that's when it's really time to panic
because that that's what I think that's
what's going to make his thesis. That's
what's going to test his thesis. And if
you asked me 5 weeks ago,
you know, did I think that we're in any
danger, anything on the horizon in terms
of seeing, you know, reversal of 401(k)
flows and rise significant rise in
unemployment, I would have said no. I
was I was completely sanguine
5 weeks ago. And I've, like I said, I've
180'd. So I can't leave on that much of
a downbeat note. So for the last
question, you run a long short fund.
If that's the downside of AI, if that's
the negative we're seeing in the world
of white-collar work,
what's the long side of the portfolio?
What looks attractive
through and on the other side of
whatever happens with either the AI
thesis or or Green's thesis? Well,
okay, the the tough thing is there
obviously are going to be companies that
benefit from AI, right? And so they're
the hyperscalers. But if you have But if
they're in the index, which they all are
and they're major parts of the index,
and you have index fund flows,
well, the bull case is that over the
long term they're going to be, you know,
there's going to be a great buying
opportunity. So I'm not sure that's
where you hide out. I mean, what what
we've been doing for the past month is
creating a set of what I think are
highly convex trades in the book,
especially basically shorting credit. So
it's not like the lead-up to the GFC.
There's not, you know, deep
CDS market, but I think I mean, credit
spreads are stupidly tight and credit
vol is stupidly low. So to me, you want
convexity, you and there are lots of
ways to pay it where you're capping your
potential loss.
That's how we're That's how we're
approaching it. So like And look, I hope
this doesn't play out. I mean, I cuz I
don't have like a plan B or C after AI
takes, you know, like my job, but um
you know, at least as it does play out,
we're we're positioning for it. Well,
thank you, Carson. Always fascinating.
Everybody, let's hear for Carson Block
of Muddy Waters.
I would be remiss if I didn't thank the
crack team that helps put these
conversations together each week. Alexis
Noriega is my video producer, Sean Russo
is my researcher, Anna Luke is my
podcast producer.
I'm Barry Ritholtz. You've been
listening to Masters in Business on
Bloomberg Radio.